Clara Tott, in other sources Clara Dett, Clara of Dettingen, Tettingen, or Clare Dettin (c. 1440 – 1520), was a court singer associated with the Elector Palatine Frederick I, whom she is said to have secretly married.
Clara Tott was the daughter of Gerhard Tott, who worked for the Augsburg city council. She was employed as a maid to Duchess Anna (1420–1474), the second wife of Duke Albert III of Bavaria. At court in Munich, she worked as a singer.
In 1459, there began a love affair with Frederick I, Elector Palatine. They had two sons, who are described as legitimate in various documents, although it is unclear when, exactly, Clara and Frederick married. Some sources say they married in 1462. In any case, the marriage was secret until 1472, when Frederick, the eldest son, wanted a position in the cathedral chapters of Speyer and Worms and needed to prove his descent unambiguously. In 1470, Elector Philip the Sincere had relieved his uncle Frederick I from his promise not to marry in 1470; nevertheless, for reasons of state the whole situation was kept secret.
After Frederick I died in 1479, his successor Philip even held Clara prisoner at Lindenfels Castle for several years, just to keep the situation secret.[1] Contemporary historians describe the situation vaguely and express themselves very carefully, so as to not displease the powerful Palatinate.[citation needed] Later historians have adopted the unclear terminology of their predecessors, even when the issue became less important dynastically and historically[2]
In the 19th century, the historians Johann Ludwig Klüber and August Wilhelm Heffter researched the issue and wrote a very detailed paper, showing on the basis of clear evidence that both sons had been legitimate and that Clara Tott must have descended from a noble family.[3][4]
Clara Tott was musically talented and had a lasting effect on the musical life at court in Heidelberg. She assisted her husband when he organized the local choir, and induced him to appoint the famous singer Johann Steinwert von Soest as its leader.
A street in Augsburg is named after her.
Max Meyer-Olbersleben composed Clare Dettin, an opera in 3 acts, Op. 41 (1894) 
Clara Tott and Elector Frederick I had a happy marriage.[citation needed] They had two sons:
Frederick of Bavaria (1460 – 16 October 1474), a canon in the cathedral chapter in Speyer, and later also in Worms. He died before his father and, like his father, he was buried in the Franciscan church in Heidelberg. His epitaph referred to him as an illegitimate son of the elector. The grave stone, with a portrait of Frederick dressed as a cleric, was still in the church in 1716. It was, however, severely damaged by the French.[6]
Louis of Bavaria (1463-1523). He was raised to imperial count by Emperor Maximilian I on 24 February 1494. His father left him the County of Löwenstein. He was known as Louis of Bavaria and was the founder of House of Löwenstein-Wertheim. His heirs acquired the County of Wertheim and were later raised to princes of the Holy Roman Empire.
Elector Frederick I ruled until his death on behalf of his nephew and adopted son Philip the Sincere. This may have been the reason why he did not arrange a regular share of his inheritance for his two sons with Clara Tott. They would only be entitled to inherit the Electorate of the Palatinate if Philip and his sons would die before they did. If the descendants of Philip were to die out, then the most senior member of the Princely House of Löwenstein-Wertheim would inherit.[7][8] 
The 2001 Arkansas Razorbacks football team represented the University of Arkansas as a member of the Southeastern Conference (SEC) during the 2001 NCAA Division I-A football season. Led by fourth-year head coach Houston Nutt, the Razorbacks compiled an overall record 7–5 with a mark of 4–4 in conference play, placing in a three-way tie for third in the SEC's Western Division. Arkansas was invited to the Cotton Bowl Classic, where the Razorbacks lost to Oklahoma. The team played home games at Razorback Stadium in Fayetteville, Arkansas and War Memorial Stadium in Little Rock, Arkansas.
With 18 seconds to play, the Razorbacks grabbed their first win of the year from the UNLV Rebels.[4] Running back Cedric Cobbs ran in from one yard away to give the Hogs a 14–10 win. Arkansas had only 114 total yards, 49 of those coming on the final scoring drive, as Cobbs had 29 yards on 13 carries.[5] Four Razorback QBs played. Lawrence Richardson returned an interception for a touchdown for the other Razorback touchdown.[5]
In a game delayed twice due to lightning, in front of a record crowd in the newly expanded Donald W. Reynolds Razorback Stadium, the Razorbacks had a 3–0 lead until the fourth quarter, when Tennessee roared back for 13 points and the win.[6] Cedric Cobbs broke the thousand yard milestone with a forty-yard dash, setting up the only Razorback points of the contest, a 24-yard Brennan O'Donohoe field goal.[6] The Hogs would gain −3 yards offensively from that point, and Tennessee would not score until a 33-yard field goal with 9:44 to play. An Arkansas punt and seven Volunteer plays later produced another field goal, giving Tennessee a 6–3 lead.[6] Travis Stephens of Tennessee would later spin in from three yards out, producing the first and final touchdown in the final minute.[6] Freshman Stevens would have 206 yards, leading #8 Tennessee to a win.[7]
Alabama scored 21 points from three Arkansas miscues, and defeated the Razorbacks 31–10.[8] A 42-yard fumble recovery for a touchdown by Tide defender Reggie Myles, coupled with a Thurman Ward interception returned for a 60-yard touchdown gave the Tide a win despite being outgained (315–249) and losing the time-of-possession battle (35:28–24:32).[9]
Ryan Sorahan, who had to leave the game due to a back injury, was 14 of 19 for 139 yards. Zak Clark and later Tarvaris Jackson (who would later transfer to Alabama A&M and later play for the Minnesota Vikings) would spell him.[8][9]
Georgia QB David Greene finished two yards short of 300 and RB Musa Smith finished five yards shy of 100 as Georgia handed Arkansas its third straight SEC loss.[10] Back-up Hog QB Zak Clark started the game between the Hedges for the injured Sorahan, and RB Brandon Holmes left the game after spraining his left shoulder.[11]
The Bulldogs opened the scoring with a 2-yard Verron Hayes run, countered by the Hogs with a Holmes TD run.[11] The SEC foes then swapped field goals, before Greene hooked up with Terrence Edwards for a seven-yard TD strike.[10] After another field goal by each squad, Georgia took a 20–13 halftime lead.[11] In the third quarter, Razorback Marvin Jackson returned a punt 74 yards for a touchdown, the first since 1992, but Georgia's Musa Smith responded by diving two yards for a score.[10] After a third Razorback field goal by O'Donohoe, the Dogs put the game away with a four TD pass from Greene.[11]
Lawrence Richardson returned the game's opening kickoff 98 yards for a touchdown, and the Hogs never looked back in their 42–19 win against the Wildcats of Weber State.[12] Razorback running back Brandon Holmes added another score from one yard out to make it a 14–0 Hog lead.[13] In the second quarter, George Wilson hauled in a 33-yard strike to push the lead to 21–0.[13] To open the second half scoring, Hog RB Fred Talley sprinted 35 yards to the end zone, and after a Weber State score, Razorback Decori Birmingham added a ten-yard touchdown scamper, making the score 35–7.[12] The Wildcats connected on a 17-yard TD pass, but missed the extra point, making it a 35–13 Arkansas lead. Matt Jones then electrified the homecoming crowd with a 59-yard touchdown run to cap the Arkansas scoring at 42–13.[13] Weber State would add another score with less than a minute remaining, but Arkansas would take a 42–19 final.[12]
Arkansas upset the ninth-ranked Gamecocks in Little Rock, giving the Hogs their first SEC win. Carlos Hall blocked a game-tying field goal attempt with less than a minute to play to preserve the victory.[14]
Neither team penetrated the endzone in the first half, with the only scoring being a first quarter Brennan O'Donohoe field goal for the Razorbacks.[15] Coming out of halftime, the Gamecocks used a reverse on a kick return to start their lone scoring drive.[14] Back-up QB Corey Jenkins would finish the drive with a 41-yard scramble into the endzone.[15] Arkansas responded on the next possession with a Zak Clark to Richard Smith 10-yard TD pass, giving the Razorbacks a 10–7 lead.[14] With 6:23 left to play, the Gamecocks drove and set up a game-tying field goal.[15] South Carolina Kicker Daniel Weaver kicked the ball, and Razorback Carlos Hall leapt and deflected the kick with both hands, giving the Gamecocks their first loss and the Hogs the 10–7 win.[14]
With the win, the Razorbacks moved to 11–0 in Little Rock under Nutt.[14][15]
Freshman Matt Jones scored two touchdowns, including a passing TD on his first collegiate pass, as Arkansas defeated Auburn 42–17.[16] Arkansas took advantage of Auburn miscues, including eleven penalties and three turnovers.[17] Tony Bua intercepted a pass with thirty seconds before halftime, which resulted in a 16-yard touchdown pass as the half came to a close.[16] Jermaine Petty capped the Arkansas scoring with an 88-yard interception returned for a touchdown.[17]
The marathon game featured 114 points, 988 offensive yards, four 100-yard rushers, and seven overtimes, with Arkansas prevailing 58–56.[18][19] The game started slowly, however, with a 7–7 tie going into halftime. Arkansas completed a field goal attempt in the third quarter, giving the Hogs a 10–7 edge.[20] A tying 32-yard field goal attempt was then set up by Eli Manning.[20] Razorback fullback Mark Pierce ran in from one yard away to take a 17–10 Arkansas lead in the fourth quarter, but Eli Manning connected with Jamie Armstead to send the game into overtime.[18]
Razorback RB Cedric Cobbs scored from 16 yards out to start the overtime scoring.[20] Eli Manning responded with an 11-yardtouchdown pass, sending the game to a second overtime, in which neither team would score.[18] Matt Jones scrambled all 25 yards for the go-ahead touchdown, but the two point run failed.[20] Ole Miss drove to the one-yard line, where Joe Gunn ran in.[18] Given a chance to end the game by completing the two-point conversion, Eli Manning threw the ball, but it was incomplete, sending the game to its fourth extra frame.[20] Rebel receiver Bill Flowers hauled in a 21-yard pass from Manning to take the lead, 30–24.[18] After the Rebels failed the two point pass, Jones threw a 24-yard TD pass to George Wilson.[20] The Hogs would fail the two point run, extending the game to a fifth overtime.[18] Jones again scored for the Razorbacks, an 8-yard rush, but failed the two-point conversion.[20] Manning hit his tight end Doug Zeigler from twelve yards out, and failed the two point pass.[18] In the sixth overtime, Zeigler again caught a Manning aerial, and Ole Miss connected on the two-point conversion with a Charles Stackhouse rush, taking a 50–42 lead.[20] Razorback Pierce ran in from two yards out, and Arkansas completed the tying two-point conversion on a Jones pass.[18] The game would go to a seventh overtime.[20]
Mark Pierce again ran in for a two-yard touchdown (his third two-yard score of the game), and Decori Birmingham would receive the two point pass from Jones, making it a 58–50 Hog lead.[20] Manning would throw his sixth touchdown pass, but the two point pass to Doug Ziegler was stopped by Jermaine Petty, giving Arkansas a 58–56 win over rival Ole Miss.[18]
The two teams combined for 60 first downs, 130 rushing attempts (80 from the Razorbacks), 68 pass attempts, and 198 total offensive plays, while limiting mistakes, including two fumbles, eight penalties, and one sack.[18][20]
The win moved Arkansas to 5–3 on the year and 3–0 in overtime.[18] Arkansas would play another seven-overtime game, in 2003.
Arkansas RB Fred Talley ran for 198 yards, including an 81-yard touchdown, as Arkansas fought off a late rally to beat UCF, 27–20.[21] The Knights scored on a 52-yard pass with three minutes to play, but fell short on their final drive.[22] Arkansas QB Zak Clark completed nine of fourteen passes, and Arkansas improved to 6–3 on the year.
Arkansas' Cedric Cobbs ran in from fifteen yards out with 47 seconds on the clock to beat the Bulldogs of Mississippi State, 24–21.[23] Cobbs scored three total TD's, Jones rushed for 131 yards, and Arkansas moved to 4–3 in conference play and 7–3 overall.[24]
Cobbs started off the scoring with a 5-yard rushing TD in the first quarter, giving Arkansas an early 7–0 lead.[23] Josh Morgan of Mississippi State scooped up a fumble and scored in the second quarter, tying the game at 7–7.[24] In the third quarter Hog kicker Brennan O'Donohoe kicked a 19-yard field goal, followed by a Cobbs TD run, producing a 17–7 Razorback edge.[23] Bulldog QB Kevin Fant completed a 21-yard pass, followed three minutes later by a 25-yard TD run from the Bulldogs, giving them a 21–17 lead.[24] Cobbs would run in for the go-ahead score, but Mississippi State drove to the Arkansas 48 before Fant was intercepted, sealing the Razorback win.[23]
LSU held off an Arkansas rally to end the Hogs six game win streak.[25] LSU Running back LaBrandon Toefield ran for 173 yards and three touchdowns, with quarterback Rohan Davey throwing for 359 yards, three touchdowns, and four interceptions.[26]
LSU started things off in Baton Rouge with a 62-yard LaBrandon Toefield touchdown run.[25] Arkansas responded with a Matt Jones three-yard touchdown scamper and two field goals.[26] Toefield struck again, this time from nine yards out.[25] Matt Jones hooked up with Richard Smith for a Razorback touchdown, giving a 19–14 Hog lead.[26] Tiger Rohan Davey completed a 20-yard pass to close out the first half scoring, giving the Tigers a 20–19 lead at half.[25] Davey hit Michael Clayton for a 60-yard touchdown, but the Hogs responded with a 61-yard Matt Jones TD pass to Sparky Hamilton.[26] Davey and Toefield would add another score each.[26] Arkansas, down 41–25, began to rally. Hog QB Zak Clark threw two touchdown passes, but the Hogs fell three points short, 41–38.[25][26]
The Razorbacks earned a berth in the Cotton Bowl Classic after a 7–4 regular season. They were slated to play the #10 Oklahoma Sooners, who had recently lost their National Championship hopes after a loss to Oklahoma State in Bedlam.[27] Arkansas QBs were sacked nine times by Oklahoma, setting a school record and tying a Cotton Bowl Classic record.[28] Arkansas could manage only 50 yards of total offense, and one Brennan O'Donohoe field goal.[27] Oklahoma QB Nate Hybl ran in from one yard out for the only touchdown of the game.[28] Sooner Rocky Calmus, the Butkus Award winner and Nagurski, Bednarik, and Lombardi finalist had nine tackles and a fumble recovery in the effort.[29] Razorback coach Houston Nutt said, "[The Oklahoma defense is] the best I've seen in 15 years."[27]
The Scapegoat (1854–1856) is a painting by William Holman Hunt which depicts the "scapegoat" described in the Book of Leviticus. On the Day of Atonement, a goat would have its horns wrapped with a red cloth – representing the sins of the community – and be driven off.
Hunt started painting on the shore of the Dead Sea, and continued it in his studio in London. The work exists in two versions, a small version in brighter colours with a dark-haired goat and a rainbow, in Manchester Art Gallery, and a larger version in more muted tones with a light-haired goat in the Lady Lever Art Gallery in Port Sunlight. Both were created over the same period, with the smaller Manchester version being described as "preliminary" to the larger Lady Lever version, which was the one exhibited.[1]
In the Royal Academy exhibition catalogue Hunt wrote that "the scene was painted at Sodom, on the margin of the salt-encrusted shallows of the Dead Sea. The mountains beyond are those of Edom."[2] He painted most of the work on location in 1854, but completed the work in London in the following year, adding some touches in 1856 before its exhibition at the academy.[2]
The painting was the only major work completed by Hunt during his first trip to the Holy Land, to which he had travelled after a crisis of religious faith. Hunt intended to experience the actual locations of the Biblical narratives as a means to confront the relationship between faith and truth. While in Jerusalem, Hunt had met Henry Wentworth Monk, a millenarian prophet who had distinctive theories about the meaning of the scapegoat and the proximity of the Last Judgement. Monk was particularly preoccupied with Christian Zionism.
Hunt chose a subject derived from the Torah as part of a project to convert Jews to Christianity. He believed that Judaic views of the scapegoat were consistent with the Christian conception of the Messiah as a suffering figure. He wrote to his friend Millais, "I am sanguine that [the Scapegoat] may be a means of leading any reflecting Jew to see a reference to the Messiah as he was, and not as they understand, a temporal King."[3]
The Book of Leviticus describes a "scapegoat" which must be ritually expelled from the flocks of the Israelite tribes as part of a sacrificial ritual of cleansing. In line with traditional Christian theology, Hunt believed that the scapegoat was a prototype for the redemptive sacrifice of Jesus, and that the goat represented that aspect of the Messiah described in Isaiah as a "suffering servant" of God. Hunt had the picture framed with the quotations "Surely he hath borne our Griefs and carried our Sorrows; Yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of GOD and afflicted." (Isaiah 53:4) and "And the Goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a Land not inhabited." (Leviticus 16:22)
The reaction to the painting was not as Hunt expected. In his autobiography Pre-Raphaelitism and the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, Hunt relates the first reaction to the painting by art dealer Ernest Gambart:
Gambart, the picture-dealer, was ever shrewd and entertaining. He came in his turn to my studio, and I led him to The Scapegoat. "What do you call that?"
"The Scapegoat."
"Yes; but what is it doing?"
"You will understand by the title, Le bouc expiatoire."
"But why expiatoire?" he asked.
"Well, there is a book called the Bible, which gives an account of the animal. You will remember."
"No," he replied, "I never heard of it."
"Ah, I forgot, the book is not known in France, but English people read it more or less," I said, "and they would all understand the story of the beast being driven into the wilderness."
"You are mistaken. No one would know anything about it, and if I bought the picture it would be left on my hands. Now, we will see," replied the dealer. "My wife is an English lady, there is a friend of hers, an English girl, in the carriage with her, we will ask them up, you shall tell them the title; we will see. Do not say more."
The ladies were conducted into the room. "Oh how pretty! what is it?" they asked.
"It is The Scapegoat." I said.
There was a pause. "Oh yes," they commented to one another, "it is a peculiar goat, you can see by the ears, they droop so."
The dealer then, nodding with a smile towards me, said to them, "It is in the wilderness."
The ladies: "Is that the wilderness now? Are you intending to introduce any others of the flock?" And so the dealer was proved to be right, and I had over-counted on the picture's intelligibility.
 William Holman Hunt, loc cit.[4]
Dante Gabriel Rossetti, in a letter to William Allingham in 1856, called the painting "a grand thing, but not for the public". Ford Madox Brown wrote in his diary: "Hunt's Scapegoat requires to be seen to be believed in. Only then can it be understood how, by the might of genius, out of an old goat, and some saline encrustations, can be made one of the most tragic and impressive works in the annals of art." Ernest Gambart, as related by Hunt, was less enthusiastic, and was later to remark: "I wanted a nice religious picture and he painted me a great goat."[5][6] The Art Journal in 1860, at the time of the exhibition of Hunt's later work The Finding of the Saviour in the Temple, was to characterise the painting as "having disappointed even his warmest admirers".[7]
At the time of the exhibition of The Scapegoat itself, in 1856, The Art Journal questioned Hunt's eye for colour in the painting, casting doubt that the mountains of Edom, seen in the background, really were in actual appearance as painted – which Matthew Dennison, writing in The Spectator in 2008 described the Manchester version as "Day-Glo striations of lilac, crimson and egg-yolk yellow". Dennison suggests the possibility that Hunt was painting the scene from memory, when he was finishing the painting in London after he had returned from his trip to the Dead Sea, and mis-remembered it.[8] Evolutionary biologist W. D. Hamilton, who saw the painting as a boy and was deeply impressed by the "sci-fi book cover" intensity of it, wrote after visiting Israel that "now on the shores of the Dead Sea I knew that I saw exactly the background I had remembered...if anything more exceptional, more other-worldly, than the painting had made them."[9] Hunt's own description of the landscape that he painted is that "never was so extraordinary a scene of beautifully arranged horrible wilderness. It is black, full of asphalte scum and in the hand slimy, and smarting as a sting – No one can stand and say that it is not accursed of God."[8][10] Art critic Peter Fuller, in 1989, described the landscape of the painting as "a terrible image [...] of the world as a god-forsaken wasteland, a heap of broken images where the sun beats".[10]
The Kings Bay Plowshares are a group of seven Catholic peace activists who broke into the Kings Bay Naval Submarine Base and carried out a symbolic act of protest against nuclear weapons.[1][2] The name of the action and the wider anti-nuclear Plowshares movement comes from the prophet Isaiah’s command to "beat swords into plowshares."
Kings Bay Naval Base is the home port to Submarine Squadron 20, with at least five Ohio-class ballistic missile submarines, each of which is capable of carrying 24 Trident II missiles with nuclear weapons.
On April 4, 2018, the group, dressed in black, cut a hole in a security fence and entered the naval base while singing and praying, and recording the action with body cams. They hung a banner that read "The Ultimate Logic of Trident: Omnicide", attached a poster of Martin Luther King Jr. to a model of a Trident II D5 ballistic missile, festooned the area with crime-scene tape, spray-painted "Love One Another" on the pavement, pounded a display of a Tomahawk missile with a hammer, and poured their own blood on an official seal of the base. One of them left an indictment against the United States, another left a copy of Daniel Ellsberg’s 2017 book The Doomsday Machine, and a third read Pope Francis’s statement denouncing nuclear weapons.[3]
The activists were willingly arrested two hours after entering the base. They were jailed and charged with conspiracy, destruction of government property, depredation of a naval installation, and trespassing. Four of them were released on bail after two months, the other three remained in jail for more than a year.
On October 21, 2019 the group went before a jury in a U.S. District Court in Brunswick, Georgia. They pled not guilty and the Seven insisted that they, in fact, had not entered the base to commit a crime, but entered in order to prevent one from occurring, the crime of "omnicide", the destruction of the human race which is possible in a nuclear war. In the face of this threat that the US nuclear arsenal poses to the world, they believed what they had done was not illegal, but a "symbolic disarmament", an act of civil resistance.[3]
The seven were barred from citing their religious motivations in their defense. Judge Lisa Godbey Wood prevented all mention of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The seven were also prevented from mounting a "necessity defense", claiming that lawbreaking was necessary to prevent the far more severe crime of nuclear war. They could also not mention international law or treaties restricting nuclear weaponry.[4]
On October 24, 2019, a federal grand jury found the seven guilty on three felony counts and a misdemeanor charge.[5]
Skiddaw is a mountain in the Lake District National Park in England. Its 931-metre (3,054 ft) summit is traditionally considered to be the fourth-highest peak but depending on what topographic prominence is thought to be significant is also variously ranked as the third- and the sixth-highest in England. It lies just north of the town of Keswick, Cumbria, in the historic county of Cumberland and dominates the skyline in this part of the northern lakes. It is the simplest of the Lake District mountains of this height to ascend (as there is a well-trodden tourist track from a car park to the north-east of Keswick, near the summit of Latrigg) and, as such, many walking guides recommend it to the occasional walker wishing to climb a mountain. This is the first summit of the fell running challenge known as the Bob Graham Round when undertaken in a clockwise direction.
The mountain lends its name to the surrounding areas of Skiddaw Forest and Back o' Skidda, and to the isolated Skiddaw House, situated to the east, formerly a shooting lodge and subsequently a youth hostel. It also provides the name for the slate derived from that region: Skiddaw slate. Skiddaw slate has been used to make tuned percussion musical instruments or lithophones, such as the Musical Stones of Skiddaw held at the Keswick Museum and Art Gallery.
The Northern Fells make up a roughly circular upland area approaching 10 miles (16 kilometres) in width. At the centre is the marshy depression of Skiddaw Forest, a treeless plateau, or valley, at an elevation of about 400 metres (1,300 feet); flowing outwards from here are the rivers that divide the area into three sectors. "Forest" is used here in its original sense, meaning land used for hunting, rather than a woodland. The south-western sector, between the Glenderaterra Beck and Dash Beck, contains Skiddaw and its satellites.[1]
Skiddaw itself takes the form of a north–south ridge about 1⁄2 mile (800 metres) long, with steep slopes to east and west. The ridge continues northwards over Broad End to Bakestall, a fell overlooking the Whitewater Dash waterfall. Further ridges fan out east and west from the southern end of Skiddaw. To the south-east are Skiddaw Little Man, Lonscale Fell and Latrigg, an easily accessible viewpoint for Keswick and Derwentwater. Beyond these fells are the Glenderaterra Beck and the Blencathra group. The south-western ridge curves round through 180 degrees to run north above the shore of Bassenthwaite Lake. This gives Skiddaw an 'outer wall', comprising Carl Side, Long Side and Ullock Pike, collectively referred to as Longside Edge. The final member of the Skiddaw Group is Dodd, a satellite of Carl Side.
Between Skiddaw and Longside Edge are the quiet valleys of Southerndale and Barkbethdale, separated by the spur of Buzzard Knott. These drain the western flanks of the fell to Bassenthwaite Lake. The eastern side of Skiddaw drains into Skiddaw Forest, much of the water reaching Candleseaves Bog. This marsh is the source of both the Dash Beck flowing north west to Bassenthwaite and the River Caldew, beginning its long journey north-eastward to the Solway Firth via Carlisle. Two smooth spurs on this eastern flank of Skiddaw, Sale How and Hare Crag, are listed as separate tops in some guidebooks.[2] Sale How is also a Nuttall.
Skiddaw's slopes are generally rounded and convex, looking from a distance as though a thick velvet blanket has been draped over a supporting frame. On the ridges the general terrain is of loose stones, but elsewhere all is grass and heather. Wainwright noted that "Its lines are smooth, its curves graceful; but because the slopes are steep everywhere, the quick build-up of the “massif” from valley levels to central summit is appreciated at a glance — and it should be an appreciative glance, for such massive strength and such beauty of outline rarely go together."[1]
The bedrock of Skiddaw, commonly known as Skiddaw Slate, is the Kirkstile Formation. This Ordovician rock is composed of laminated mudstone and siltstone with greywacke sandstone. At the summit this is overlain by scree and to the south are areas where the underlying Loweswater Formation surfaces.
The summit ridge bears a number of tops, which from north to south are known[1][2] as North Top, High Man (the summit), Middle Top and South Top. All now bear cairns and a number of stone windshelters have been erected. Skiddaw has a subsidiary summit, Little Man, which lies about 1.5 kilometres (1 mile) south-south-east of the main peak. Despite its limited independence, Wainwright listed it as a separate fell in his influential Pictorial Guide to the Lakeland Fells, a convention which is often followed. Skiddaw Little Man has its own subsidiary summit, known as Lesser Man.
The view is as panoramic as might be expected, given Skiddaw's topographic prominence. From High Man the north east quadrant is filled by the quiet fells of Back o'Skiddaw, with the Border hills, the Cheviots and the North Pennines behind them. To the south east are Blencathra, the Far Eastern Fells and the Helvellyn range; behind these are vistas of the Yorkshire Dales and Forest of Bowland. The Coniston Fells are visible directly to the south. On the other side of South Top is a fine view of the Scafells, Western and North Western Fells, with a portion of Snowdonia visible between Kirk Fell and Pillar. The Isle of Man is visible 60 miles (100 kilometres) away, as are the Mourne Mountains 120 miles (195 km) away (on exceptionally clear days). The final quarter is taken up by the coastal plain and the distant Solway Firth, backed by the hills of Galloway such as Merrick and Criffel, and Broad Law in the Scottish Borders. Goat Fell on Arran can be seen at an angle of 313 degrees, 105 miles (170 km) away.
The most distant view is of Slieve Meelmore in the Mountains of Mourne in County Down, Northern Ireland, 120 miles (195 km) distant.
By moving to South Top a superb view of Borrowdale can be brought into sight.[1]
Many routes of ascent have been devised for Skiddaw; indeed, it is hard to devise a challenging approach in good conditions. The most popular tourist route starts from Keswick and first ascends behind Latrigg, before the climb continues over the slopes of Little Man to the summit. About 200 metres (660 ft) of ascent can be saved by driving to the top of Gale Road and beginning from the public car park just behind the summit of Latrigg.
Another popular route (and the one recommended by Wainwright[1]) is to follow Longside Edge, first ascending Ullock Pike, Longside and Carl Side before making the steep climb up from Carlside Col. Also from the north, a somewhat tougher alternative is to walk up Buzzard Knott between Southerndale and Barkbethdale: after crossing to the southern edge of the shoulder above Randel Crag ascend due east to the summit. Rather easier than either of these is the compass-walk due south from Cock Up (505 metres (1,657 ft)); reversing this route provides a safe descent, especially in bad weather. Scramblers may prefer simply to walk up Southerndale and climb Longside via a distinctive crevice seen easily from Skiddaw summit.
From the south-west at Millbeck, Carlside Col can be reached directly. A start from nearby Applethwaite can also be used to provide a variation to the tourist route. From the north-west a tough but picturesque ascent can be made to the northern end of Longside Edge before following the ridge route to the summit. Finally, ascents from due east are possible for the walker who first makes for Skiddaw House, a good distance from either Keswick, Threlkeld or Peter House. Once Skiddaw House is reached a fairly direct line is possible, climbing over either Sale How or Hare Crag.[1]
From the north-east an unmarked but quite easy and fairly well-worn path starts at Whitewater Dash waterfall (on the Cumbrian Way) where the walker can follow the fence (along Birkett Edge just south of Dead Crags) past the Bakestall outcrop, and follow the fence until just before the unnamed top at 831 metres (2,726 ft). From the 831m top, a path leads directly to Skiddaw Man.
Early forms of the name from the include Skythou in c.1260 and Skydehow in 1247.[3] According to Eilert Ekwall, Skiddaw's name is derived from the Old Norse elements skyti or skut + haugr meaning either "archer's hill" or "jutting crag hill".[4] Diana Whaley likewise interprets it as "the mountain with the jutting crag", but also offers the alternative that the first element may be a personal name or Old Norse skítr 'dung, filth, shit'.[5] Richard Coates suggests that "it is possible that a Cumbric solution is to be sought."[5]
Little is known of the house in the 19th century, but it was used by both gamekeepers and shepherds beyond 1860 and there were rooms for Egremont and the shooting parties.[6] Canon Rawnsley, a founder of the National Trust, visited in about 1900 and mentions in one of his books the hospitality of the shepherd's family at that time.[7][8] Sir Hugh Walpole, author of the Lake District novel Rogue Herries, was a visitor in the 1920s and 30s and used the house as the scene, set in 1854, of the murder by Uhland.[9]
These arrangements for accommodation continued until the early 1950s. Several families brought up their children there until they were able to go to school, but the longest tenure was possibly that of Pearson Dalton, a shepherd and bachelor from the Caldbeck area, who came to stay for a month in 1952 and left in 1969 aged 75. He lived there alone for five days a week, only going home for long weekends with his sister in Caldbeck, then returning on the Monday to resume his duties. By that time farming practices had changed and the house was no longer needed; it declined, although there was intermittent use by various schools and outdoor groups.[6]
In 1986 the house was leased by John Bothamley, who had created the YHA Carrock Fell Hostel 13 kilometres (8 miles) away; and eventually the building was handed over to the YHA. It closed in 2002 following a disagreement over the lease. In 2007 it re-opened as an independent hostel run by the Skiddaw House Foundation, under the YHA's Enterprise franchising model.[6]
Below Sale How, at an elevation of 470 metres (1,540 ft) is Skiddaw House, a stone building which has variously served as a shooting lodge, a shepherd's bothy and a Youth Hostel. Its windbreak comprises the only trees in Skiddaw Forest, and it is reached by a long access track up the Dash Valley. Kitchen range
Built around 1829 by the Earl of Egremont, it was originally a keeper's lodge: a base for grouse shooting and for the gamekeepers who managed the extensive land owned by Egremont in Skiddaw Forest.